> この記事は[イアン・シャピーロ](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/イアン・シャピーロ)から翻訳されています。


**イアン・シャピーロ**（Ian Shapiro、[1956年](../Page/1956年.md "wikilink") - ）は、[アメリカ合衆国](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/アメリカ合衆国 "wikilink")の[政治学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/政治学者 "wikilink")。専門は、[民主主義](../Page/民主主義.md "wikilink")理論、政治学方法論。

[ブリストル大学](../Page/ブリストル大学.md "wikilink")卒業後、[イェール大学](../Page/イェール大学.md "wikilink")で修士号および博士号取得。現在、イェール大学政治学部教授。

## 著書

### 単著

  - *The Evolution of Rights in Liberal Theory*, (Cambridge University Press, 1986).
  - *Political Criticism*, (University of California Press, 1990).
  - *Democracy's Place*, (Cornell University Press, 1996).
  - *Democratic Justice*, (Yale University Press, 1999).
  - *The State of Democratic Theory*, (Princeton University Press, 2003).

<!-- end list -->

  -
    [中道寿一](../Page/中道寿一.md "wikilink")訳『民主主義理論の現在』（[慶應義塾大学出版会](../Page/慶應義塾大学出版会.md "wikilink"), 2010年）

<!-- end list -->

  - *The Moral Foundations of Politics*, (Yale University Press, 2003).
  - *The Flight from Reality in the Human Sciences*, (Princeton University Press, 2005).
  - *Containment: Rebuilding a Strategy against Global Terror*, (Princeton University Press, 2007).
  - *The Flight from Reality in the Human Sciences*, (Princeton University Press, 2008).
  - *The Real World of Democratic Theory*, (Princeton University Press, 2010).

### 共著

  - *Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory: A Critique of Applications in Political Science*, with Donald P. Green, (Yale University Press, 1994).
  - *Death by a Thousand Cuts: the Fight over Taxing Inherited Wealth*, with Michael J. Graetz, (Princeton University Press, 2005).

### 編著

  - *The Rule of Law*, (New York University Press, 1994).
  - *Abortion: the Supreme Court Decisions*, (Hackett, 1995, 2nd ed., 2001, 3rd ed., 2007).

### 共編著

  - *Power, Inequality, and Democratic Politics: Essays in Honor of Robert A. Dahl*, co-edited with Grant Reeher, (Westview Press, 1988).
  - *Democratic Community*, co-edited with John W. Chapman, (New York University Press, 1993).
  - *Theory and Practice*, co-edited with Judith Wagner DeCew, (New York University Press, 1995).
  - *Political Order*, co-edited with Russell Hardin, (New York University Press, 1996).
  - *Ethnicity and Group Rights*, co-edited with Will Kymlicka, (New York University Press, 1997).
  - *Integrity and Conscience*, co-edited with Robert Adams, (New York University Press, 1998).
  - *Democracy's Edges*, co-edited with Casiano Hacker-Cordon, (Cambridge University Press, 1999).
  - *Democracy's Value*, co-edited with Casiano Hacker-Cordon, (Cambridge University Press, 1999).
  - *Global Justice*, co-edited with Lea Brilmayer, (New York University Press, 1999).
  - *Designing Democratic Institutions*, co-edited with Stephen Macedo, (New York University Press, 2000).
  - *The Democracy Sourcebook*, co-edited with Robert Dahl and Jose Antonio Cheibub, (MIT Press, 2003).
  - *Problems and Methods in the Study of Politics*, co-edited with Rogers M. Smith and Tarek E. Masoud, (Cambridge University Press, 2004).
  - *Rethinking Political Institutions: the Art of the State*, co-edited with Stephen Skowronek and Daniel Galvin, (New York University Press, 2006).
  - *Political Contingency: Studying the Unexpected, the Accidental, and the Unforeseen*, co-edited with Sonu Bedi, (New York University Press, 2007).
  - *Identities, Affiliations, and Allegiances*, co-edited with Seyla Benhabib and Danilo Petranovic, (Cambridge University Press, 2007).
  - *Divide and Deal: the Politics of Distribution in Democracies*, co-edited with Peter A. Swenson and Daniela Donno, (New York University Press, 2008).
  - *Order, Conflict, and Violence*, co-edited with Stathis N. Kalyvas, (Cambridge University Press, 2008).

[Category:アメリカ合衆国の政治学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:アメリカ合衆国の政治学者 "wikilink") [Category:イェール大学の教員](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:イェール大学の教員 "wikilink") [Category:1956年生](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1956年生 "wikilink") [Category:存命人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:存命人物 "wikilink")