> この記事は[ニコラス・ウィーラー](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/ニコラス・ウィーラー)から翻訳されています。


**ニコラス・ウィーラー**（Nicholas J. Wheeler; [1962年](../Page/1962年.md "wikilink")[4月7日](../Page/4月7日.md "wikilink") - (歳)）は、[イギリス](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/イギリス "wikilink")の[国際政治学者](../Page/国際政治学者.md "wikilink")。

[サウサンプトン大学](../Page/サウサンプトン大学.md "wikilink")で博士号取得。[ロンドン大学キングス・カレッジ](../Page/キングス・カレッジ・ロンドン.md "wikilink")、国際戦略研究所、[ハル大学](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/ハル大学 "wikilink")を経て、現在、国際政治学部教授。

核戦略研究から出発し、近年は（連帯主義的）[英国学派](../Page/英国学派.md "wikilink")の観点から、[人道的介入](../Page/人道的介入.md "wikilink")の問題に取り組んでいる。

## 著書

### 単著

  - *Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention in International Society*, (Oxford University Press, 2000).

### 共著

  - *The British Origins of Nuclear Strategy, 1945-1955*, with Ian Clark, (Clarendon Press, 1989).
  - ''The Security Dilemma: Fear, Cooperation and Trust in World Politics '', with Ken Booth, (Palgrave, 2007).

### 共編著

  - *Human Rights in Global Politics*, co-edited with [Tim Dunne](../Page/ティム・ダン.md "wikilink"), (Cambridge University Press, 1999).
  - *Dimensions of Military Intervention*, co-edited with Colin McInnes, (Frank Cass, 2002).
  - *National Interest and International Solidarity: Particular and Universal Ethics in International Life*, co-edited with Jean-Marc Coicaud, (United Nations University Press, 2007).

## 論文

### 単著

  - "Pluralist or Solidarist Conceptions of International Society: Bull and Vincent on Humanitarian Intervention", *Millennium*, vol. 21, no. 3 (1992).
  - "Guardian Angel or Global Gangster: the Ethical Claims of International Society Revisited", *Political Studies*, vol. 44, no. 1 (1996).
  - "Agency, Humanitarianism and Intervention", *International Political Science Review*, vol 18, no. 1 (1997).
  - "Humanitarian Vigilantes or Legal Entrepreneurs: Enforcing Human Rights in International Society", *Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy*, vol. 3, no.1 (2000).
  - "Humanitarian Intervention after Kosovo: Emergent Norm, Moral Duty or the Coming Anarchy", *International Affairs*, vol. 77, no. 1 (2001).
  - "Legitimating Humanitarian Intervention: Principles and Procedures'", *Melbourne Journal of International Law and Politics*, vol. 2, no. 2 (2001).
  - "Dying for Enduring Freedom: Accepting Responsibility for Civilian Casualties in the War Against Terrorism", *International Relations*, vol. 16, no. 2 (2002).
  - "The Humanitarian Responsibilities of Sovereignty' in Jennifer Welsh ed., *Humanitarian Intervention in International Relations*, (Oxford University Press, 2004).

### 共著

  - "Hedley Bull's Pluralism of the Intellect and Solidarism of the Will", *International Affairs*, vol. 72, no. 1 (1996). with Tim Dunne.
  - "Humanitarian Intervention and State Practice at the End of the Cold War", in Jeremy Larkins and Rick Fawn eds., *International Society After the Cold War: Anarchy and Order Reconsidered*, (Macmillan, 1996). with Justin Morris.
  - "Good International Citizenship: A Third Way for British Foreign Policy", *International Affairs*, vol. 74, no. 4 (1998). with Tim Dunne.
  - "Hedley Bull's Idea of a World Community: Fictional, Imagined or Primordial?", in B. A. Roberson ed. *International Society and the Development of International Relations*, (Francis Pinter, 1998). with Tim Dunne.
  - "East Timor and the New Humanitarian Interventionism", *International Affairs*, vol. 77, no. 4 (2001). with Tim Dunne.

[Category:イギリスの政治学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:イギリスの政治学者 "wikilink") [Category:国際関係研究者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:国際関係研究者 "wikilink") [Category:アベリストウィス大学の教員](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:アベリストウィス大学の教員 "wikilink") [Category:1962年生](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1962年生 "wikilink") [Category:存命人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:存命人物 "wikilink")