> この記事は[町田泰則](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/町田泰則)から翻訳されています。


**町田 泰則**（まちだ やすのり、[1948年](../Page/1948年.md "wikilink") - ）は、[日本](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/日本 "wikilink")の[分子生物学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/分子生物学者 "wikilink")（[植物](../Page/植物.md "wikilink")を材料とする）。[名古屋大学](../Page/名古屋大学.md "wikilink")大学院理学研究科特任教授、名誉教授。

タバコや[シロイヌナズナ](../Page/シロイヌナズナ.md "wikilink")を用いて、植物の細胞分裂や細胞分化及び成長の仕組みを研究している。これらの業績により、2010年にアメリカ科学振興協会（AAAS）のフェローに選ばれた。また最近、植物細胞の分裂の最終段階である細胞板形成の分子機構に関する研究により、日本植物学会 学術賞（2013年）と日本植物生理学会賞（2015年）を授与された。

## 略歴

  - 1948年 [群馬県](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/群馬県 "wikilink")[渋川市](../Page/渋川市.md "wikilink")出身
  - 1972年 [千葉大学](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/千葉大学 "wikilink")[理学部](../Page/理学部.md "wikilink")生物学科卒業
  - 1978年 [名古屋大学](../Page/名古屋大学.md "wikilink")大学院理学研究科博士課程満了（[理学博士](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/理学博士 "wikilink")）：岡崎令治、恒子教授のもとでDNAの不連続的複製機構の研究、[日本学術振興会](../Page/日本学術振興会.md "wikilink")奨励研究員
  - 1979年-1982年 [ニューヨーク州立大学](../Page/ニューヨーク州立大学.md "wikilink")医学部博士研究員：大坪栄一教授のもとでDNAトンランスポジションの分子機構の研究
  - 1982年-1984年 [農林水産省](../Page/農林水産省.md "wikilink")[植物ウイルス研究所](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/植物ウイルス研究所 "wikilink")研究員：クラウンゴール腫瘍形成の分子機構の研究
  - 1984年-1987年 名古屋大学理学部助手：クラウンゴール腫瘍形成の分子機構の研究
  - 1987年-1989年 名古屋大学理学部助教授：植物細胞の分裂と分化の研究
  - 1989年-1997年3月 名古屋大学理学部（大学院理学研究科）教授：植物細胞の分裂と分化の研究
  - 1997年4月-1999年3月 [京都大学](../Page/京都大学.md "wikilink")大学院理学研究科 教授
  - 1999年4月-2012年3月 名古屋大学大学院理学研究科 教授
  - 2012年4月-2016年3月 名古屋大学大学院理学研究科 特任教授、名誉教授
  - 2016年4月- 2017年3月 名古屋大学大学院理学研究科 研究員、名誉教授
  - 2017年4月- 2019年3月 名古屋大学大学院理学研究科 シニアリサーチフェロー、名誉教授
  - 2019年4月- 名古屋大学大学院理学研究科 客員教授、名誉教授

## 主要論文

  - 主な原著論文

<!-- end list -->

  - Machida, Y., Okazaki, T. and Okazaki, R.: Discontinuous Replication of Replicative Form DNA from Bacteriophage φX174. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA**.*** 74, 2776-2779 (1977)
  - Wada A., Tachibana H., Ueno S., Hushimi Y and Machida Y.: Melting Fine Structure of DNA Fragments of Known Sequence from φX174. *Nature* 269, 352-353 (1977)
  - Machida Y., Machida C., Ohtsubo H. and Ohtsubo E.: Fractors Determining Recombination Frequency Mediated by an Insertion Sequence IS1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 79, 277-281 (1982)
  - Machida Y., Machida C. and Ohtsubo E.: A novel type of transposon generated by insertion element IS102 present in a pSC101 derivative. *Cell* 30, 29-36 (1982)
  - Machida C., Machida Y., Wang H.-C. R., Ishizaki K. and Ohtsubo E.: Repression of cointegration ability of insetion element IS1 by transcriptional readthrough from flanking regions. *Cell* 34, 135-142 (1983)
  - Machida Y., Sakurai M., Kiyokawa S., Ubasawa A., Suzuki Y. and Ikeda J.-E: Nucleotide sequence of the IS element found in the T-DNA region of mutant Ti plasmid pTiA66 and distribution of its homologues in octopine Ti plasmid. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 81, 7495-7499 (1984)
  - Machida Y., Machida C. and Ohtsubo E.: The insertion element IS1 encodes two structural genes responsible for its transposition. *J. Mol. Biol.* 177, 229-245 (1984)
  - Machida C., Machida Y. and Ohtsubo E.: Both inverted repeat sequences of the insertion element IS1 provide promorter function for RNA polymerase. *J. Mol. Biol.* 177, 247-265 (1984)
  - Machida C. and Machida Y.: Base substitutions in transposable element IS1 cause DNA duplication of variable length at the target site for plasmid cointegration. *EMBO J.* 6, 1799-1803 (1987)
  - Usami S., Takebe I. and Machida Y.: Novel factor inducing Agrobacterium tumefaciens vir gene expression is present in monocotyledonous plants. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 85, 3748-3752 (1988)
  - Machida C. and Machida Y.: Regulation of IS1 transposition by the insA gene product. *J. Mol. Biol.* 208, 567-574 (1989)
  - Shimoda N., Toyoda-Yamamoto A., Nagamine J., Usami S., Katayama M., Sakagami Y. and Machida Y.: Control of expression of Agrobacterium vir genes by synergistic actions of phenolic signal molecules and monosaccharides. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 87, 6684-6688 (1990)
  - Onouchi H., Yokoi K., Machida C., Matsuzaki H., Ohshima Y., Matsuoka K., Nakamura K. and Machida Y.: Operation of an efficient site-specific recombination system of Zygosaccharomyces rouxii in tobacco cells. *Nucleic Acids Research* 19, 6373-6378 (1991)
  - Shimoda N., Toyoda-Yamamoto A., Aoki S. and Machida Y.: Genetic Evidence for an Interaction between the VirA Sensor Protein and the ChvE Sugar-binding protein of Agrobacterium. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 26552-26558 (1993)
  - Yoshioka Y., Matsumoto S., Kojima S., Ohshima K., Okada N. and Machida Y.: Molecular characterization of a short interspersed repetitive element (SINE) from tobacco that exhibits sequence homology to specific tRNAs. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.* USA 90, 6562-6566 (1993)
  - Banno H., Hirano K., Nakamura T., Irie K., Nomoto S., Matsumoto K. and Machida Y.: NPK1, a tobacco gene that encodes a protein with a domain homologous to yeast BCK1, STE11 and Byr2 protein kinases. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 13, 4745-4752 (1993)
  - Muranaka T., Banno H. and Machida Y.: Characterization of Tobacco Protein Kinase NPK5, a Homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae SNF1 That Constitutively Activates Expression of the Glucose-Repressible SUC2 Gene for a Secreted Invertase of S. cerevisiae. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 14, 2958-2965 (1994)
  - Usami, S., Banno, H., Ito, Y., Nishihama, R. and Machida, Y.: Cutting activates a 46-kilodalton protein kinase in plants. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.* USA 92, 8660-8664 (1995)
  - Ohba, T., Yoshioka, Y., Machida, C. and Machida, Y.: DNA rearrangement associated with the integration of T-DNA in tobacco: an example for multiple duplications of DNA around the integration target. *Plant J.* 7, 157-164 (1995)
  - Nishihama, R. Banno, H., Kawahara, E., Irie, K., and Machida, Y. : Possible involvement of differential splicing in the regulation of the activity of Arabidopsis ANP1 that is related to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinases (MAPKKKs). *Plant J.* 12, 39-48 (1997)
  - Machida, C., Onouchi, H., Koizumi, J., Hamada, S., Semiarti, E., Torikai, S. and Machida, Y.: Characterization of the transposition pattern of the Ac element in Arabidopsis thaliana using endonuclease I-SceI. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94, 8675-8680 (1997)
  - Hamada, S., Onouchi, H., Tanaka, H., Kudo, M., Liu, Y.-G., Shibata, D., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: Mutations in the WUSCHEL gene of Arabidopsis thaliana result in the development of shoot without juvenile leaves. *Plant J.* 24, 91-103 (2000)
  - Nishihama, R., Ishikawa, M., Araki, S., Soyano, T., Asada, T., and Machida,Y.: The NPK1 mitogen-activated kinase kinase kinase is a regulator of cell-plate formation in plant cytokinesis. *Genes Dev.* 15, 352-363 (2001)
  - Semiarti, E., Ueno, Y., Tsukaya, H., Iwakawa, H., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: The ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana regulates formation of a symmetric lamina, establishment of venation and repression of meristem-related homeobox genes in leaves. *Development* 128, 1771-1783 (2001)
  - Tanaka, H., Onouchi, H., Kondo, M., Hara-Nishimura, I., Nishimura, M., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: A subtilisin-like serine protease is required for epidermal surface formation in Arabidopsis embryos and juvenile plants. *Development* 128, 4681-4689 (2001)
  - Nishihama, R., Soyano, T., Ishikawa, M., Araki, S., Tanaka, H., Asada, T., Irie, K., Ito, M., Terada, M., Banno, H., Yamazaki, Y., and Machida, Y.: Expansion of the Cell Plate in Plant Cytokinesis Requires a Kinesin-Like Protein/MAPKKK Complex. *Cell* 109, 87-99 (2002). Cover
  - Kitakura, S., Fujita, T., Ueno, Y., Terakura, S., Wabiko, H., and Machida, Y.: The protein encoded by oncogene *6b* from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* interacts with a nuclear protein of tobacco. *Plant Cell* 14, 451-463 (2002)
  - Tanaka, H., Watanabe, M., Watanabe, D., Tanaka, T., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: ACR4, a putative receptor kinase gene of Arabidopsis thaliana that is expressed in the outer cell layers of embryos and plants, is involved in proper embryogenesis. *Plant Cell Physiol.* 43, 419-428 (2002)
  - Iwakawa, H., Ueno, Y., Semiarti, E., Onouchi, H., Kojima, S., Tsukaya, H., Hasebe, M., Soma, T., Ikezaki, M., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: The ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana, required for formation of a symmetric flat leaf lamina, encodes a member of a novel family of proteins characterized by cysteine repeats and a leucine zipper. *Plant Cell Physiol.* 43, 467-478 (2002). Cover
  - Soyano, T., Nishihama, R., Morikiyo, K., Ishikawa, M., and Machida, Y.: NQK1/NtMEK1 is a MAPKK that acts in the NPK1 MAPKKK-mediated MAPK cascade and is required for plant cytokinesis. *Genes Dev.* 17, 1055-1067 (2003)
  - Tanaka, T., Tanaka, H., Machida, C., Watanabe, M., and Machida, Y.: A new method for rapid visualization of defects in leaf cuticle reveals five intrinsic patterns of surface defects in Arabidopsis. *Plant J.* 37, 139-146 (2004)
  - Tanaka, H., Ishikawa, M., Kitamura, S., Takahashi, Y., Soyano, T., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: The *AtNACK1/HINKEL* and *STUD/TETRASPORE/AtNACK2* genes, which encode functionally redundant kinesins, are essential for cytokinesis in *Araidopsis*. *Genes Cells* 9, 1199-1211 (2004)
  - Araki, S., Ito, M., Soyano, T., Nishihama, R., and Machida, Y.: Mitotic cyclins stimulate the activity of c-Myb-like factors for transactivation of G2/M phase-specific genes of tobacco. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 32979 - 32988 (2004)
  - Sasabe, M., Soyano, T., Takahashi, Y., Sonobe, S., Igarashi, H., Itoh, TJ., Hidaka, M., and Machida, Y.: Phosphorylation of NtMAP65-1 by a MAP kinase down-regulates its activity of microtubule bundling and stimulates progression of cytokinesis of tobacco cells. *Genes Dev.* 20, 1004-1014 (2006)
  - Terakura, S., Kitakura, S., Ishikawa, M., Ueno, Y., Fujita, T., Machida, C., Wabiko, H., and Machida, Y.: Oncogene *6b* from *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* induces abaxial cell division at late stages of leaf development and modifies vascular development in petioles. *Plant & Cell Physiol*. 47, 664-672 (2006)
  - Tanaka, H., Watanabe, M., Sasabe, M., Hiroe, T., Tanaka, T., Tsukaya, T., Ikezaki, M., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: Novel receptor-like kinase ALE2 controls shoot development by specifying epidermis in Arabidopsis. *Development* 134, 1643-1652 (2007)
  - Iwakawa, H., Iwasaki, M., Kojima, S., Ueno, Y., Soma, T., Tanaka, H., Semiarti, E., Machida, Y. and Machida, C.: Expression of the *ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2* gene in the adaxial domain of Arabidopsis leaves represses cell proliferation in this domain and is critical for the development of properly expanded leaves. *Plant J.* 51, 173-184 (2007)
  - Ueno, Y., Ishikawa, T., Watanabe, K., Terakura, S., Iwakawa, H., Okada, K., Machida, C. and Machida, Y.: Histone deacetylases and ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 are involved in the establishment of polarity in leaves of Arabidopsis. *Plant Cell* 19(2), 445-457 (2007)
  - Terakura, S., Ueno, Y., Tagami, H., Kitakura, S., Machida, C., Wabiko, H., Aiba, H., Otten, L., Tsukagoshi, H., Nakamura, K., and Machida, Y.: An oncoprotein from the plant pathogen Agrobacterium has histone-chaperone-like activity. *Plant Cell* 19, 2855-2865 (2007)
  - Ishikawa, T., Machida, C., Yoshioka, Y., Ueda, T., Nakano, A., and Machida, Y.: The *EMBRYO YELLOW* gene, encoding a subunit of the conserved oligomeric Golgi complex, is required for appropriate cell expansion and meristem organization in *Arabidopsis thaliana.* *Genes to Cells* 13, 521-535 (2008)
  - Kitakura, S., Terakura, S., Yoshioka, Y., Machida, C. and Machida, Y.: Interaction between *Agrobacterium* oncoprotein 6b and a tobacco nucleolar protein that is homologous to TNP1 encoded by a transposable element of *Antirrhinum majus*. *J. Plant Research* 121, 425-433 (2008)
  - Matsumura, Y., Iwakawa, H., Machida, Y. and Machida, C.: Characterization of genes in the *ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2/LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARIES* (*AS2/LOB*) family in *Arabidopsis thaliana* and functional and molecular comparisons between *AS2* and other family members. *Plant J.* 58, 525-537 (2009) <doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03797.x>.
  - Ikezaki, M., Kojima<sup>,</sup> M., Sakakibara, H., Kojima<sup>,</sup> S., Ueno, Y., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: Genetic networks regulated by *ASYMMETRIC LEAVES1* (*AS1*) and *AS2* in leaf development in *Arabidopsis*: *KNOX* genes control five morphological events. *Plant J.* 61, 70-82 (2010) <doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04033.x>.
  - Kosetsu, K., Matsunaga, S., Nakagam, H., Colcombet, J., Sasabe, M., Soyano, T., Takahashi, T., Hirt, H., and Machida, Y.: The MAP kinase MPK4 is required for cytokinesis in Arabidopsis thaliana. *Plant Cell* 23, 3778-3790 (Nov. 23 on line) (2010)
  - Takahashi, Y., Soyano<sup>,</sup> T., Kosetsu<sup>,</sup> K., Sasabe, M. and Machida, Y.: HINKEL kinesin, ANP MAPKKKs and MKK6/ANQ MAPKK, which phosphorylates and activates MPK4 MAPK, constitute a pathway that is required for cytokinesis in *Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell Physiol.* 51, 1766-1776 (2010), Cover.
  - Sasabe, M., Boudolf, V., De Veylder, L., Inzé, D., Genschik, P, and Machida, Y.: Phosphorylation of a mitotic kinesin-like protein and a MAPKKK by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) is involved in the transition to cytokinesis in plants. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 108 (43), 17844-17849 (2011) \[Oct 17, Epub\]
  - Ishibashi, N., Kanamaru, K., Ueno, Y., Kojima, S., Tetsuo Kobayashi, T., Machida, C., and Machida, Y.: ASYMMETRIC-LEAVES2 and an ortholog of eukaryotic NudC domain proteins repress expression of *AUXIN-RESPONSE-FACTOR* and class 1 *KNOX* homeobox genes for development of flat symmetric leaves in Arabidopsis. *Biol. Open*, 1 (3), 197-207 (2012)
  - Luo, L., Ando, S., Sasabe, M., Machida, C., Kurihara, D., Higashiyama, T., Machida, Y.: Arabidopsis ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 protein required for leaf morphogenesis consistently forms speckles during mitosis of tobacco BY-2 cells via signals in its specific sequence. *J. Plant Res.* 125, 661-668 (2012)
  - Nakagawa, A., Takahashi, H., Kojima, S., Sato, N., Ohga, K., Cha, B. Y., Woo, J.-T., Nagai, K., Horiguchi, G., Tsukaya, H., Machida, Y. and Machida, C.: Berberine enhances defects in the establishment of leaf polarity in *asymmetric leaves1* and *asymmetric leaves2* of *Arabidopsis thaliana.* *Plant Mol. Biol.* 79, 569-581 (2012)
  - Takahashi, H., Iwakawa, H., Ishibashi, N., Kojima, S., Matsumura, Y., Prananingrum, P., Iwasaki, M., Takahashi, A., Ikezaki, M., Luo, L., Kobayashi, T., \*Machida,<sup>,</sup> Y., and \*Machida, C.: Meta-analyses of microarrays of *Arabidopsis* *asymmetric leaves1* (*as1*), *as2* and their modifying mutants reveal a critical role of the ETT pathway in stabilization of adaxial-abaxial patterning and cell division during leaf development. *Plant Cell Physiol*. 54, 418-431 (2013). <doi:10.1093/pcp/pct027>. (\*equally contributed)
  - Iwasaki M., Takahashi, H., Iwakawa, H., Nakagawa, A., Ishikawa, T., Tanaka, H., Matsumura, Y., Pekker, I., Eshed, Y., Vial-Pradel, S., Ito, T., Watanabe, Y., Ueno, Y., Fukazawa, H., Kojima, S., Machida,, Y., and Machida, C.: Dual regulation of ETTIN (ARF3) gene expression by AS1-AS2, which maintains the DNA methylation level, is involved in stabilization of leaf adaxial-abaxial partitioning in Arabidopsis. *Development* 140, 1958-1969 (2013) (selected as "IN THIS ISSUE")
  - Ishibashi, N., Machida, C., Machida, Y.: *ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2* and *FASCIATA2* cooperatively regulate the formation of leaf adaxial-abaxial polarity in *Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Biotechnology* 30, 411-415 (2013)
  - Sasabe M, Ishibashi N, Haruta T, Minami A, Kurihara D, Higashiyama T, Nishihama R, Ito M and Machida Y.: The carboxyl-terminal tail of the stalk of Arabidopsis NACK1/HINKEL kinesin is required for its localization to the cell plate formation site. *J. Plant Res.* 128(2):327-36 (2015)
  - Suzuki, T., Matsushima, C., Nishimura, S., Higashiyama, T., Sasabe, M. Machida, Y.: Identification of Phosphoinositide-binding Protein PATELLIN2 as a Substrate of *Arabidopsis* MPK4 MAP Kinase during Septum Formation in Cytokinesis. *Plant Cell Physiol* 57(8):1744-55 (2016) <doi:10.1093/pcp/pcw098>.
  - Matsumura, Y., Ohbayashi, I., Takahash, H., Kojima, S., Ishibashi, N., Keta, S, Nakagawa, A., Hayashi, R., Saéz-Vásquez, J., Echeverria, M., Sugiyama, M., Nakamura,K., Machida, C. and Machida, Y.: A genetic link between epigenetic repressor AS1-AS2 and a putative small subunit processome in leaf polarity establishment of *Arabidopsis. Biol. Open* 5(7):942-954 (2016) <doi:10.1242/bio.019109>.
  - Luong, Q-T., Keta, S., Toshiharu Asai, T., Kojima, S., Nakagawa, A., Xia, S., José Luis Micol, J.L., Machida, Y., and Machida, C.: A genetic link between epigenetic repressor AS1-AS2 and DNA replication factors in establishment of adaxial-abaxial polarity of *Arabidopsis. Plant Biotechnology* 35: 39-49 (2018). <doi:10.5511/plantbiotechnology.18.0129b>.
  - Vial-Pradel, S., Keta, S., Nomoto, M., Takahashi, H., Suzuki, M., Yokoyama, Y., Sasabe, M., Kojima, S., Tada, Y., \*Machida, Y., and \*Machida, C.: Arabidopsis zinc-finger-like protein ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2 (AS2) and two nucleolar proteins maintain gene body DNA methylation in the leaf polarity gene ETTIN (ARF3). *Plant Cell Physiol.* 59(7): 1385–1397 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcy031.
  - Luo, L., Ando, S., Sakamoto, Y., Suzuki, T., Takahashi, H., Ishibashi, N., Kojima, S., Kurihara, D., Higashiyama, T., Yamamoto, K.-T., Matsunaga, S., Machida, C., Sasabe, M., and Machida, Y. The formation of perinucleolar bodies is important for normal leaf development and requires the zinc-finger DNA-binding motif in *Arabidopsis* ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2. *Plant J.* 101, 1118-1134 (2020) doi: 10.1111/tpj.14579. Cover

## 受賞歴など

  - 1987年 日本植物学会奨励賞
  - 2002-2007年 21世紀COEプログラム『システム生命科学:分子シグナル系の統合』拠点リーダー
  - 2010年 Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
  - 2012-2013年 日本植物生理学会 会長
  - 2013年 （公社）日本植物学会賞 学術賞
  - 2015年 （一社）日本植物生理学会賞

## 外部リンク

  - [21世紀COEプログラム研究成果報告書](http://www.bio.nagoya-u.ac.jp/coe/2004pamphlet)

[Category:日本の分子生物学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:日本の分子生物学者 "wikilink") [Category:日本の植物学者](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:日本の植物学者 "wikilink") [Category:名古屋大学の教員](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:名古屋大学の教員 "wikilink") [Category:京都大学の教員](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:京都大学の教員 "wikilink") [Category:名古屋大学出身の人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:名古屋大学出身の人物 "wikilink") [Category:千葉大学出身の人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:千葉大学出身の人物 "wikilink") [Category:群馬県出身の人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:群馬県出身の人物 "wikilink") [Category:1948年生](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:1948年生 "wikilink") [Category:存命人物](https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:存命人物 "wikilink")